OTEP: Recording exceptions as log records (#4333)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: oteps/4333-recording-exceptions-on-logs.md

# Recording exceptions and errors with OpenTelemetry

This OTEP provides guidance on how to record exceptions using OpenTelemetry logs focusing on minimizing duplication and providing context to reduce the noise.

## Motivation

> OTel recommends recording exceptions using span events available through Trace API. Outside of OTel world, exceptions are usually recorded by user apps and libraries using logging libraries.

Reviewer: > OTel recommends recording exceptions using span events

Do we actually make such a recommendation?

https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/tree/main/docs/exceptions Lists conventions on how to store Exceptions in Spans and Logs, but I don't see any recommendation being made there.... Is there another place I am missing?

Author: you're right, I'll change the wording.

what I mean is that the only documented (in the spec) way is https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/exceptions.md. If we combine it with no-user-facing-log-api we had until recently, it results in span events being the only guaranteed way to record exceptions for instrumentation library that don't want to depend on a logging facade. Not a problem in some languages, a problem in others.

> Log-based exception events have the following advantages over span events:

Reviewer: Agree with all of this. Minor point worth adding - one advantage of using SpanEvents for Exception is that they *automatically* get sampled along with the corresponding Spans - It is possible to achieve similar effects with Logs, but users have to do extra work to ensure Logs are sampled similar to Spans.

Author: I feel like it's a disadvantage since users don't have a choice. And a similar effect can be achieved with a configuration option and `logger.IsEnabled(..., context)`. I.e. I feel this is not a fundament problem - we can make log sampling almost as easy as with span events.

- they can be recorded for operations that don't have any tracing instrumentation
- they can be sampled along with or separately from spans
- they can have different severity levels to reflect how critical the exception is

> - they are already reported natively by many frameworks and libraries

Reviewer: one more advantage: SpanEvents has the potential of being affected by the Max_SpanEvents_Per_Span limit.

Author: curious why is it an advantage? I think it's a safe belt preventing buffering unbound amount of events on spans, with log based events we have batching processor for it and also can do more interesting things like log throttling in the pipeline.

Reviewer: I meant to say that, when using Spans for Exceptions, there is a chance that my exception is the one that gets dropped due to span events already full by some other stuff. Yes limit is for own safety, but if the exception gets lost, then that is also bad...

Author: Great point! I added an open question on this. I'd love to see some log throttling mechanisms. 

I'm going to resolve this discussion since it's a general log question not specific to exceptions.

} catch (ContentNotFoundException ex) {
    // we don't record exception here, but may record a log record without exception info
    logger.logRecordBuilder()
        // let's assume it's expected that some content can disappear
        .severityNumber(Severity.INFO)
        .addAttribute(AttributeKey.stringKey("error.type"), ex.getClass().getCanonicalName())
        .addAttribute(AttributeKey.stringKey("com.example.content.id"), contentId)
        .emit();

    return response(HttpStatus.NOT_FOUND);
} catch (NotAuthorizedException ex) {
    // let's assume it's really unexpected - service lost access to the underlying storage
    logger.logRecordBuilder()
        .severityNumber(Severity.ERROR)
        .addAttribute(AttributeKey.stringKey("error.type"), ex.getClass().getCanonicalName())
        .addAttribute(AttributeKey.stringKey("com.example.content.id"), contentId)
        .emit();

    return response(HttpStatus.INTERNAL_SERVER_ERROR);
}
```

#### Recording exceptions inside the library (native instrumentation)

It's a common practice to record exceptions using logging libraries. Client libraries that are natively instrumented with OpenTelemetry should

> leverage OTel Events/Logs API for their logging purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
leverage OTel Events/Logs API for their exception logging purposes.
```

        logger.eventBuilder("exception")
            .setSeverity(Severity.INFO)
            .addAttribute(AttributeKey.stringKey("com.example.content.id"), contentId)
            .addAttribute(AttributeKey.stringKey("exception.type"), ex.getClass().getCanonicalName())
            .addAttribute(AttributeKey.stringKey("exception.name"), ex.getMessage())
            .addAttribute(AttributeKey.stringKey("exception.stacktrace"), getStackTrace(ex))
            .emit();
    }
}
```

Some libraries or runtimes don't record exception logs or record them in ways that are not compatible with OpenTelemetry. In this case, it's recommended to
record exception event when the exception is rethrown.

```java
public class Connection {

    private final Logger logger;
    ...
    public long send(ByteBuffer content) {
        try {
            return socketChannel.write(content);
        } catch (Throwable ex) {
            // we're rethrowing an exception here since the underlying
            // platform code may or may not record exception logs depending on JRE,
            // configuration, and other implementation details

>             logger.eventBuilder("exception")

Reviewer: "exception" here would be the EventName, right? is that the intent? Shouldn't it be more fully qualifies than just "exception"? I was thinking something like Namespace.Networking.SocketChannel.Write.Exception ?

Reviewer 2: I am not sure if we want to model it as an event (as opposed to a log record).

Different instrumentation libraries may want to add additional contextual attributes related to the exception. There may be also some use cases that one would like to set a complex body.

I have a feeling that events should have more well-defined structure and that "exception" is almost as abstract as an "event".

Author: Great points!

I agree that `exception` event name is not particularly useful. We don't have to record exceptions as events at all. I changed this otep to default to logs. There is also recommendation to define custom error events in the text.

   leveraging trace-only backends such as Jaeger.

   **Mitigation:**
   - OpenTelemetry API and/or SDK may provide span events -> log events conversion.
     See also [Event vision OTEP](./0265-event-vision.md#relationship-to-span-events).

## Prior art and alternatives

Alternatives:

1. Deduplicate exception info on logs. We can mark exception instances as logged
   (augment exception instance or keep a small cache of recently logged exceptions).
   This can potentially mitigate the problem for existing application when it logs exceptions extensively.
   We should still provide optimal guidance for the greenfield applications and libraries.

2. Log full exception info only when exception is thrown for the first time
   (including new exceptions wrapping original ones). This results in at-most-once
   logging, but even this is known to be problematic since absolute majority of exceptions
   are handled.
   It also relies on the assumption that most libraries will follow this guidance.

## Open questions

TBD

## Future possibilities

1. OpenTelemetry should provide configuration options and APIs allowing (but not limited) to:

>    - Record unhandled exceptions only (the default documented in this guidance)

Reviewer 3: Sharing some learnings from .NET https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/tree/main/docs/trace/reporting-exceptions#unhandled-exception

Author: Nice! Added an encouragement to provide such guidance and a link to it.

# Recording exceptions and errors on logs

<!-- toc -->

- [Motivation](#motivation)
- [Guidance](#guidance)
  * [Details](#details)
- [API changes](#api-changes)
- [Examples](#examples)
  * [Logging exception from client library in a user application](#logging-exception-from-client-library-in-a-user-application)
  * [Logging error inside the natively instrumented Library](#logging-error-inside-the-natively-instrumented-library)
  * [Logging errors in messaging processor](#logging-errors-in-messaging-processor)
    + [Natively instrumented library](#natively-instrumented-library)
    + [Instrumentation library](#instrumentation-library)
- [Trade-offs and mitigations](#trade-offs-and-mitigations)
- [Prior art and alternatives](#prior-art-and-alternatives)
- [Open questions](#open-questions)
- [Future possibilities](#future-possibilities)

<!-- tocstop -->

This OTEP provides guidance on how to record exceptions using OpenTelemetry logs focusing on minimizing duplication and providing context to reduce the noise.

## Motivation

> Today OTel supports recording exceptions using span events available through Trace API. Outside of OTel world, exceptions are usually recorded by user apps and libraries using logging libraries and may be recorded as OTel logs via logging bridge.

Reviewer 2: We should also call out that that it would be helpful for metrics instrumentation (that do not produce spans at all) so they could report exceptions (errors).

Author: I think it's covered on line 30 below 

> - they can be recorded for operations that don't have any tracing instrumentation

LMK if there something else I can add

Exceptions recorded on logs have the following advantages over span events:

- they can be recorded for operations that don't have any tracing instrumentation
- they can be sampled along with or separately from spans
- they can have different severity levels to reflect how critical the exception is
- they are already reported natively by many frameworks and libraries

Recording exceptions is essential for troubleshooting, but regardless of how exceptions are recorded, they could be noisy:

- distributed applications experience transient errors at the rate proportional to their scale and exceptions in logs could be misleading -
  individual occurrence of transient errors are not necessarily indicative of a problem.
- exception stack traces can be huge. Corresponding attribute value can frequently reach several KBs resulting in high costs
  associated with ingesting and storing them. It's also common to log exceptions multiple times while they bubble up
  leading to duplication and aggravating the verbosity problem.

> In this OTEP, we'll provide guidance around recording exceptions that minimizes duplication, allows to reduce noise with configuration and
> allows to capture exceptions in absence of a recorded span.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In this OTEP, we'll provide guidance around recording exceptions that minimizes duplication, allows reducing noise with configuration, and
allows capturing exceptions in the absence of a recorded span.
```

This guidance applies to general-purpose instrumentations including native ones. Application developers should consider following it as a
starting point, but they are encouraged to adjust it to their needs.

## Guidance

This guidance boils down to the following:

> Instrumentations should record exception information (along with other context) on the log record and

Reviewer 4: (not sure?)
```suggestion
Instrumentations should record exception information (along with other context) as a log record and
```

use appropriate severity - only unhandled exceptions should be recorded as `Error` or higher.
Instrumentations should strive to report each exception once.

Instrumentations should provide the whole exception instance to the OTel SDK (instead of individual attributes)

> and the SDK should, based on configuration, decide which information to record. As a default,
> this OTEP proposes to record exception stack traces on logs with `Error` or higher severity.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
and the SDK should, based on configuration, decide which information to record. The default SDK
behavior should be to record exception stack traces when logging exceptions at `Error` or higher severity.
```

### Details

> 1. Exceptions should be recorded on [logs](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/exceptions/exceptions-logs.md)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. Exceptions should be recorded as [logs](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/exceptions/exceptions-logs.md)
```

   or [log-based events](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/general/events.md)

2. Instrumentations for incoming requests, message processing, background job execution, or others that wrap user code and usually create local root spans, should record logs
   for unhandled exceptions with `Error` severity.

   Some runtimes provide global exception handler that can be used to log exceptions.
   Priority should be given to the instrumentation point where the operation context is available.
   Language SIGs are encouraged to give runtime-specific guidance. For example, here is the
   [.NET guidance](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/blob/610045298873397e55e0df6cd777d4901ace1f63/docs/trace/reporting-exceptions/README.md#unhandled-exception)
   for recording exceptions on traces.

> 3. Natively instrumented libraries should record log describing an error and the context it happened in
>    when this error is detected (or where the most context is available).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3. Natively instrumented libraries should record a log describing an exception and the context it happened in
   as soon as the exception is detected (or where the most context is available).
```

> 4. It's not recommended to record the same error as it propagates through the stack trace or
>    attach the same instance of exception to multiple log records.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
4. It's not recommended to record the same exception as it propagates through the stack frames, or
   to attach the same instance of an exception to multiple log records.
```

> 5. An error should be logged with appropriate severity depending on the available context.

Reviewer 5: I like the goal of the taxonomy, but think we need to crisp up the language around `Info`/`Warning`

Author: makes sense, updated each severity bullet with examples and some criteria related to error impact. PTAL

> 5. An error should be logged with appropriate severity depending on the available context.

Reviewer 4: error -> exception in this section below?

>    - Errors that don't indicate any issue should be recorded with severity not higher than `Info`.

Reviewer 5: What's an example of this?  I'm struggling to understand when this would be used.

Author: Most popular is exception-driven logic - you check that something is available and it throws if it's not. You try to delete something and it throws if someone concurrently deleted it.
You send a request, it times-out, you retry and get 'already exists', etc. 

It's not always the best development style, but there are plenty of real-life examples. Adding one to the text.

>    - Transient errors (even if it's the last try) should be recorded with severity not higher than `Warning`.

Author: updated to 

>    - Errors that are expected to be retried or handled by the caller or another
     layer of the component SHOULD be recorded with severity not higher than `Warn`.

with additional explanations and examples.

   - Unhandled exceptions that don't result in application shutdown should be recorded with severity `Error`
   - Errors that result in application shutdown should be recorded with severity `Fatal`.

> 6. When recording exception on logs, user applications and instrumentations are encouraged to put additional attributes

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
6. When recording exception on logs, user applications and instrumentations are encouraged to add additional attributes
```

   to describe the context that the exception was thrown in.
   They are also encouraged to define their own error events and enrich them with exception details.

7. OTel SDK should record stack traces on exceptions with severity `Error` or higher and should allow users to
   change the threshold.

   See [logback exception config](https://logback.qos.ch/manual/layouts.html#ex) for an example of configuration that
   records stack trace conditionally.

## API changes

> [!IMPORTANT]
>
> OTel should provide API like `setException` when creating log record that will record only necessary information depending
> on the configuration and log severity.

> It should not be an instrumentation library concern to decide whether exception stack trace should be recorded or not.

Reviewer 5: Two things:

1. SHOULD is normative, so please capatilize (and I think IS a normative statement here).
2. This may not be language neutral, so I think SHOULD is the right guidance here.  For example, in Rust, stack traces are something you can *opt-in* on an error.  They leave some details to libraries (see Rust Backtrace/Source capabilities on https://docs.rs/thiserror/latest/thiserror/ e.g. or C++ [prior to 23] https://github.com/jeremy-rifkin/cpptrace).  
 Additionally, in some highly green-thread/async APIs, I've seen custom stack traces created (e.g. [Scala's ZIO ](https://zio.dev/api/zio/stacktrace) where they try to preserve *logical* stack when physical stack is a confusing mess of work-stealing green-threads.  We should allow these to interact with exception reporting in OTEL in some fashion.

I agree with the sentiment, I'd expand the wording though to allow languages like Rust/C++ (and Java ecosystem) to provide stack trace compatibility with their library ecosystem.

Author: updated to use normative language. Also added 

> The signature of the method is to be determined by each language
and can be overloaded as appropriate including ability to customize stack trace
collection.

> It MUST be possible to efficiently set exception information on a log record based on configuration
and without using the `setException` method.

> Library may write logs providing exception instance through a log bridge and not be aware of this guidance.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
An instrumentation library may write logs providing an exception instance through a log bridge and not be aware of this guidance.
```

> It also maybe desirable by some vendors/apps to record all exception details at all levels.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It also may be desirable by some vendors/apps to record all exception details at all levels.
```

      .setSeverity(Severity.ERROR)
      .addAttribute("messaging.message.id", record.getId())
      ...
      .addException(ex)
      .emit();
    // ..
  }
}
```

See [corresponding Java (tracing) instrumentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/main/instrumentation/spring/spring-kafka-2.7/library/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/instrumentation/spring/kafka/v2_7/InstrumentedRecordInterceptor.java) for the details.

## Trade-offs and mitigations

1. Breaking change for any component following existing [exception guidance](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/a265ae0628177be25dc477ea8fe200f1c825b871/specification/trace/exceptions.md) which recommends recording exceptions as span events in every instrumentation that detects them.

   **Mitigation:**
   - OpenTelemetry API and/or SDK in the future may provide opt-in span events -> log-based events conversion,
     but that's not enough - instrumentations will have to change their behavior to report exception logs
     with appropriate severity (or stop reporting them).
   - We should provide opt-in mechanism for existing instrumentations to switch to logs.

> 2. Recording exceptions as log-based events would result in UX degradation for users

Reviewer 5: I think we should also call out the fact that now we have *two* channels of exporting/batching/recording information of exceptions and Traces.   In this new world, you may see a trace before an exception or vice versa, and one may be dropped where the other is not.

We probably need some other mitigatioin should that *requiring* knowledge of an exception event under a Span is no longer needed (e.g. more aggressively using Span.status and attributes around "transient failures" as we discussed in Semconv SIG.

Author: Added a clarification in the OTEP that logs are intended to replace span events (gracefully). I.e. there should be just one channel of communication at a time.

Author: also added a migration section and plan. So I think this is resolved, let me know if there is something I didn't address

  individual occurrence of transient errors are not necessarily indicative of a problem.
- exception stack traces can be huge. Corresponding attribute value can frequently reach several KBs resulting in high costs
  associated with ingesting and storing them. It's also common to log exceptions multiple times while they bubble up
  leading to duplication and aggravating the verbosity problem.

In this OTEP, we'll provide guidance around recording exceptions that minimizes duplication, allows to reduce noise with configuration and
allows to capture exceptions in absence of a recorded span.

This guidance applies to general-purpose instrumentations including native ones. Application developers should consider following it as a
starting point, but they are encouraged to adjust it to their needs.

## Guidance

This guidance boils down to the following:

Instrumentations should record exception information (along with other context) on the log record and
use appropriate severity - only unhandled exceptions should be recorded as `Error` or higher. Instrumentations
should strive to report each exception once.

> Instrumentations should provide the whole exception instance to the OTel (instead of individual attributes)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Instrumentations should provide the whole exception instance to the OTel SDK (instead of individual attributes)
```

> and the OTel SDK should, based on configuration, decide which information to record. As a default,

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
and the SDK should, based on configuration, decide which information to record. As a default,
```
As "OTel SDK" is already mentioned previously.

this OTEP proposes to record exception stack traces on logs with `Error` or higher severity.

### Details

1. Exceptions should be recorded on [logs](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/exceptions/exceptions-logs.md)
   or [log-based events](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/general/events.md)

2. Instrumentations for incoming requests, message processing, background job execution, or others that wrap user code and usually create local root spans, should record logs
   for unhandled exceptions with `Error` severity.

>     > [!NOTE]
>     >
>     > Only top-level instrumentations (native and non-native) should record exceptions at `Error` (or higher) severity.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
>
> Only top-level instrumentations (native and non-native) should record exceptions at `Error` (or higher) severity.
```
I think because it is indented, the special highlighting does not work :(

Author: oh, good catch. moved note to the summary.

>     > Only top-level instrumentations (native and non-native) should record exceptions at `Error` (or higher) severity.

Reviewer 6: Although I understand what "top-level" here means, I wonder if we shouldn't better explain this here. It might not be clear for users/instrumentation authors. 

I feel the above already does some explanation, so maybe we don't even need this note? 

> Instrumentations for incoming requests, message processing, background job execution, or others that wrap user code and usually create local root spans,

Author: I wanted to highlight this part, but you convinced me - I removed the note

   Some runtimes provide global exception handler that can be used to log exceptions.
   Priority should be given to the instrumentation point where the operation context is available.

>    Language SIGs are encouraged to give runtime-specific guidance. For example, here's

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
   Language SIGs are encouraged to give runtime-specific guidance. For example, here is the
```

>    [.NET guidance](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/tree/main/docs/trace/reporting-exceptions#unhandled-exception)

Reviewer 6: Should we use a link with a tag version here?

   for recording exceptions on traces.

> 3. Native instrumentations should record log describing an error and the context it happened in

Reviewer 6: I searched for "native instrumentation" and I only found a hit on this old OTEP https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/155/files. 

We should probably add such term to the glossary, close to the "Instrumented library" https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/glossary.md#instrumented-library and then here link to it.

Author: good catch, changed to [natively instrumented](https://github.com/svrnm/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/glossary.md#natively-instrumented)

   when this error is detected (or where the most context is available).

4. It's not recommended to record the same error as it propagates through the stack trace or
   attach the same instance of exception to multiple log records.

5. An error should be logged with appropriate severity depending on the available context.

>    - Error that don't indicate any issue should be recorded with severity not higher than `Info`.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
   - Errors that don't indicate any issue should be recorded with severity not higher than `Info`.
```

    return response(content, HttpStatus.OK);
} catch (ContentNotFoundException ex) {
    // we don't record exception here, but may record a log record without exception info
    logger.logRecordBuilder()
        .addAttribute(AttributeKey.stringKey("com.example.content.id"), contentId)
        // let's assume it's expected that some content can disappear
        .severityNumber(Severity.INFO)
        // by default SDK will only populate `exception.type` and `exception.message`
        // since severity is `INFO`, but it should not be instrumentation library
        // concern
        .setException(ex)
        .emit();

    return response(HttpStatus.NOT_FOUND);
} catch (ForbiddenException ex) {
    logger.logRecordBuilder()
        // let's assume it's really unexpected for this application - service does not have access to the underlying storage.
        .severityNumber(Severity.ERROR)
        .addAttribute(AttributeKey.stringKey("com.example.content.id"), contentId)
        // by default SDK will record stack trace for this exception since the severity is ERROR
        .setException(ex)
        .emit();

    return response(HttpStatus.INTERNAL_SERVER_ERROR);
}
```

> ### Logging error inside the library (native instrumentation)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
### Logging error inside the instrumented Library (native instrumentation)
```
Maybe?

            .setSeverity(Severity.WARN)
            .addAttribute(AttributeKey.stringKey("com.example.content.id"), contentId)
            .addAttribute(AttributeKey.stringKey("http.response.status_code"), response.statusCode())
            .addException(ex)
            .emit();

        if (response.statusCode() == 404) {
            throw new ContentNotFoundException(readErrorInfo(response));
        }

        ...
    }
}
```

Network level errors are part of normal life, we should consider using low severity for them

```java
public class NetworkClient {

    private final Logger logger;
    ...
    public long send(ByteBuffer content) {
        try {
            return socketChannel.write(content);
        } catch (SocketException ex) {
            logger.logRecordBuilder()
              // we'll retry it, so it's info or lower.
              // we'll write a warn for overall operation if retries are exhausted.
              .setSeverity(Severity.INFO)
              .addAttribute("connection.id", this.getId())
              .addException(ex)
              .emit();

            throw ex;
        }
    }
}
```

### Logging errors in messaging processor

> #### Native instrumentation

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
#### Instrumented Library
```

Below we use "Instrumentation library" so I guess we should also use the glossary term for "native" here?

# Recording exceptions and errors on logs

<!-- toc -->

- [Motivation](#motivation)
- [Guidance](#guidance)
  * [Details](#details)
- [API changes](#api-changes)
- [Examples](#examples)

>   * [Logging exception from client library in a user application](#logging-exception-from-client-library-in-a-user-application)
>   * [Logging error inside the natively instrumented Library](#logging-error-inside-the-natively-instrumented-library)
>   * [Logging errors in messaging processor](#logging-errors-in-messaging-processor)

Reviewer 4: (or maybe use the more generic "errors" everywhere?)
```suggestion
  * [Logging exceptions and errors from client library in a user application](#logging-exception-from-client-library-in-a-user-application)
  * [Logging exceptions and errors inside the natively instrumented Library](#logging-error-inside-the-natively-instrumented-library)
  * [Logging exceptions and errors in messaging processor](#logging-errors-in-messaging-processor)
```

Author: I added the following note at the begging with error/exception definitions (and went through otep trying to adhere to them):

> [!NOTE]
> Throughout the OTEP *exception* and *error* are used in the following way:
> - *Error* refers to a general concept describing any non-success condition,
>   which may manifest as an exception, non-successful status code, or an invalid
>   response.
> - *Exception* specifically refers to runtime exceptions and their associated stack traces.

  individual occurrence of transient errors are not necessarily indicative of a problem.
- exception stack traces can be huge. Corresponding attribute value can frequently reach several KBs resulting in high costs
  associated with ingesting and storing them. It's also common to log exceptions multiple times while they bubble up
  leading to duplication and aggravating the verbosity problem.

In this OTEP, we'll provide guidance around recording exceptions that minimizes duplication, allows reducing noise with configuration, and
allows capturing exceptions in the absence of a recorded span.

This guidance applies to general-purpose instrumentations including native ones. Application developers should consider following it as a
starting point, but they are encouraged to adjust it to their needs.

## Guidance

This guidance boils down to the following:

Instrumentations SHOULD record exception information (along with other context) as a log record with appropriate severity.
Only unhandled exceptions SHOULD be recorded as `Error` or higher. Instrumentations SHOULD do the best effort to report

> each exception once.

Author: I removed this sentence, it's explained in a couple other places, e.g.

> 4. It's NOT RECOMMENDED to record the same error as it propagates through the call stack, or
   to attach the same instance of an exception to multiple log records.

Hope it makes sense

   Some runtimes provide global exception handler that can be used to log exceptions.
   Priority should be given to the instrumentation point where the operation context is available.
   Language SIGs are encouraged to give runtime-specific guidance. For example, here is the
   [.NET guidance](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/blob/610045298873397e55e0df6cd777d4901ace1f63/docs/trace/reporting-exceptions/README.md#unhandled-exception)
   for recording exceptions on traces.

3. Natively instrumented libraries SHOULD record a log describing an exception and the context it happened in
   as soon as the exception is detected (or where the most context is available).

4. It's NOT RECOMMENDED to record the same exception as it propagates through the stack frames, or
   to attach the same instance of an exception to multiple log records.

5. An exception (or error) SHOULD be logged with appropriate severity depending on the available context.

   - Exceptions or errors that don't indicate actual issues SHOULD be recorded with
     severity not higher than `Info`.

     Such exceptions can be used to control application logic and have a minor impact, if any,

>      on application functionality, availability, or performance.

Reviewer 2: I think these indicate actual issues and could be reported with `Warn` severity. Minor impact is still some  impact and multiple minor issues could multiply to be a major issue. Maybe better remove this sentence?

Author: which ones? 

this section talks about 

   - Exceptions or errors that don't indicate actual issues SHOULD be recorded with
     severity not higher than `Info`.

     Such exceptions can be used to control application logic and have a minor impact, if any,
     on application functionality, availability, or performance.

     Examples:

      - exception is thrown when checking optional dependency or resource existence.
      - exception thrown when client disconnects before reading full response from the server

Reviewer 2: If it has non-zero impact then in my opinion it can be `Warn` as well.

References:
- https://www.crowdstrike.com/en-us/cybersecurity-101/next-gen-siem/logging-levels
- https://sematext.com/blog/logging-levels/
- https://github.com/serilog/serilog/wiki/configuration-basics
- https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/logs/data-model.md#field-severitynumber

     Examples:

      - exception is thrown when checking optional dependency or resource existence.
      - exception thrown when client disconnects before reading full response from the server

   - Exceptions or errors that are expected to be retried or handled by the caller or another

>      layer of the component SHOULD be recorded with severity not higher than `Warning`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     layer of the component SHOULD be recorded with severity not higher than `Warn`.
```

see: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/logs/data-model.md#field-severitynumber

## Trade-offs and mitigations

1. Breaking change for any component following existing [exception guidance](/specification/trace/exceptions.md) which recommends recording exceptions as span events in every instrumentation that detects them.

   **Mitigation:**
   - OpenTelemetry API and/or SDK in the future may provide opt-in span events -> log-based events conversion,
     but that's not enough - instrumentations will have to change their behavior to report exception logs
     with appropriate severity (or stop reporting them).
   - We should provide opt-in mechanism for existing instrumentations to switch to logs.

2. Recording exceptions as log-based events would result in UX degradation for users
   leveraging trace-only backends such as Jaeger.

   **Mitigation:**
   - OpenTelemetry API and/or SDK may provide span events -> log events conversion.
     See also [Event vision OTEP](./0265-event-vision.md#relationship-to-span-events).

## Prior art and alternatives

Alternatives:

1. Deduplicate exception info by marking exception instances as logged.
   This can potentially mitigate the problem for existing application when it logs exceptions extensively.

>    We should still provide optimal guidance for the greenfield applications and libraries.

Reviewer 2: One could mitigate it with https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/logdedupprocessor. The SDK all Contrib could also provide something similar for each language.

Author: That's less about duplication and more about writing code that writes multiple different log records as exception propagates through the stack, but stamps exception info on all of them

Reviewer 2: I am not sure why it is in "Prior art and alternatives" and not in "Open questions" or "Future possibilities".
I also think that this description could be clarified as I would never guess what it was about. I thought this is more about deduplicating e.g. callstack information.

   or as [log-based events](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.29.0/docs/general/events.md)

2. Instrumentations for incoming requests, message processing, background job execution, or others that wrap application code and usually
   create local root spans, SHOULD record logs for unhandled errors with `Error` severity.

   Some runtimes provide global exception handler that can be used to log exceptions.
   Priority should be given to the instrumentation point where the operation context is available.
   Language SIGs are encouraged to give runtime-specific guidance. For example, here is the
   [.NET guidance](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/blob/610045298873397e55e0df6cd777d4901ace1f63/docs/trace/reporting-exceptions/README.md#unhandled-exception)
   for recording exceptions on traces.

3. Natively instrumented libraries SHOULD record a log describing an error and the context it happened in
   as soon as the error is detected (or where the most context is available).

4. It's NOT RECOMMENDED to record the same error as it propagates through the call stack, or

>    to attach the same instance of an exception to multiple log records.

Reviewer 7: In python, because exceptions are objects, if you have exceptions bubbling through nested spans, I'm not sure how you'd be able to achieve this while still being able to distinguish which specific exception was raised through the higher spans.

Here is a concrete example:
```python
import asyncio

from opentelemetry.sdk.resources import SERVICE_NAME, Resource

from opentelemetry import trace
from opentelemetry.sdk.trace import TracerProvider
from opentelemetry.sdk.trace.export import BatchSpanProcessor, ConsoleSpanExporter
from opentelemetry.sdk.trace import ReadableSpan

resource = Resource(attributes={SERVICE_NAME:"test"})

def formatter(span: ReadableSpan) -> str:
    out: list[str] = []
    out.append(f"{span.name}")
    for event in span.events:
        if event.name == "exception":
            attributes = event.attributes or {}
            stacktrace = attributes.get("exception.stacktrace") or ""
            out.append(f"  {event.name}: {stacktrace}")
    out.append('')
    return "\n".join(out)

trace_provider = TracerProvider(resource=resource)
processor = BatchSpanProcessor(ConsoleSpanExporter(formatter=formatter))
trace_provider.add_span_processor(processor)
trace.set_tracer_provider(trace_provider)

tracer = trace.get_tracer("test")

async def task_1(fail: bool):
    with tracer.start_as_current_span("task_1"):
        if fail:
            raise ValueError('fail')

async def task_2(fail: bool):
    with tracer.start_as_current_span("task_2"):
        if fail:
            raise ValueError('fail')

async def task_3(fail: bool):
    with tracer.start_as_current_span("task_3"):
        if fail:
            raise ValueError('fail')

async def root(fail_1: bool, fail_2: bool, fail_3: bool) -> None:
    with tracer.start_as_current_span("root"):
        # We want to run all tasks concurrently, attempting to finish as many as possible, even if some fail
        results = await asyncio.gather(task_1(fail_1), task_2(fail_2), task_3(fail_3), return_exceptions=True)
        
        # Here is some concrete logic for handling the produced exceptions,
        # but note that we could just as easily raise the last error, ignore certain exception types, etc.
        for result in results:
            if isinstance(result, Exception):
                raise result

async def main():
    # No failures
    await root(False, False, False)

    # All failures
    try:
        await root(True, True, True)
    except Exception as e:
        pass  # keep the output clean

asyncio.run(main())
```
If you run this script, you get the following output:
```
task_1
task_2
task_3
root
task_1
  exception: Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "python3.10/site-packages/opentelemetry/trace/__init__.py", line 589, in use_span
    yield span
  File "python3.10/site-packages/opentelemetry/sdk/trace/__init__.py", line 1104, in start_as_current_span
    yield span
  File "scratch_file.py", line 34, in task_1
    raise ValueError('fail')
ValueError: fail

task_2
  exception: Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "python3.10/site-packages/opentelemetry/trace/__init__.py", line 589, in use_span
    yield span
  File "python3.10/site-packages/opentelemetry/sdk/trace/__init__.py", line 1104, in start_as_current_span
    yield span
  File "scratch_file.py", line 40, in task_2
    raise ValueError('fail')
ValueError: fail

task_3
  exception: Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "python3.10/site-packages/opentelemetry/trace/__init__.py", line 589, in use_span
    yield span
  File "python3.10/site-packages/opentelemetry/sdk/trace/__init__.py", line 1104, in start_as_current_span
    yield span
  File "scratch_file.py", line 46, in task_3
    raise ValueError('fail')
ValueError: fail

root
  exception: Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "python3.10/site-packages/opentelemetry/trace/__init__.py", line 589, in use_span
    yield span
  File "python3.10/site-packages/opentelemetry/sdk/trace/__init__.py", line 1104, in start_as_current_span
    yield span
  File "scratch_file.py", line 59, in root
    raise result
  File "scratch_file.py", line 34, in task_1
    raise ValueError('fail')
ValueError: fail
```

With the current behavior, you can tell by looking in the stack trace of the exception bubbling through the `"root"` span that the raised exception was coming from `task_1`. However, if we only record each exception once, I'm not sure how you'd be able to determine which exception was raised through the `"root"` span (e.g., if the code were changed to raise the last exception rather than the first).

While this may feel somewhat contrived because I tried to keep the example fairly minimal, I am confident that there are lots of python use cases today where, in the face of an exception, you might try a fallback codepath, and if that fallback codepath fails you still raise the error coming from the original execution path. (And there are obviously scenarios where you would want to just raise the error of the fallback codepath.) So, if each of those exceptions end up bubbling through their own spans, and subsequently bubble through a parent span where it's not clear which span was encountered, I think we need to retain a way to know which span was encountered.

Given these examples, and the flexibility of python, it's hard for me to imagine how you'd be able to know programmatically whether there was information loss if you don't record the same error as it passes through spans higher in the call stack, therefore I would consider it a regression if we lost the current behavior of recording an event every time an exception passes through a span, even if the same exception has already been recorded as passing through some child span.

I see this note below:
> It also may be desirable by some vendors/apps to record all exception details at all levels.

As long as this can be done for an arbitrary python application and isn't dependent on the instrumentations or otel SDK behavior, then I think everything is okay, I just want to point out that retaining that option is important, at least for python.

Author: I don't see any attempts to record exceptions in your example and also it's somewhat tight to tracing.

How I think this OTEP applies to your example:

```python
async def task_3(fail: bool):
    with tracer.start_as_current_span("task_3"):
        if fail:
            error = ValueError('fail')
            logger.warn("task_3 failed", exc_info=error, extra={"task.name": "task_3"})
            raise error
...

async def main():
    # All failures
    try:
        await root(True, True, True)
    except Exception as e:
        logger.error("something bad happened", exc_info=e)
        pass  # keep the output clean
```

The library (original library, not instrumentation) makes a conscious choice when to attach exception instance to log record. E.g. when connection drops, we log it in the layer that handles connections and make best effort not to log it again in the layers above. One of the ways to achieve it is by adding exception to log records when you through it for the first time. 

If exception remain unhandled (in `main` in your case), we'd log it again, with `error` severity now.

Please let me know if this explanation helps, or if you have suggestions on how to explain it better in the OTEP.

Reviewer 7: If exceptions get re-logged when they remain unhandled as they bubble through parent spans, then it's a non-issue.

Author: @dmontagu I'm not sure I understand your comment. This OTEP is completely orthogonal to tracing. You should be able to implement it without any span or span processor.

Reviewer 8: > This OTEP is completely orthogonal to tracing.

It seems that the plan is replace exceptions as span events with exceptions as log events, and that's relevant to tracing. That may not be exactly what's being proposed here, but this seems like a step in that direction, and if this is implemented then the rest is more likely to follow. If this is not the place to question that overall plan, where is a better place?

Reviewer 2: >  If this is not the place to question that overall plan, where is a better place?

I think that this:
- https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/4393

Reviewer 8: That issues starts with:

> The [long term vision for events](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/4333/0265-event-vision.md) is to leverage log based events instead of span events.

That link doesn't work properly, but it links back here. I see https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/oteps/0265-event-vision.md, but I don't see a discussion, or anything explaining the need to replace span events.

Author: there is a start of this discussion in https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/3406.

The best way to proceed would be to share the feedback on the Spec SIG call (Tue 8am PT) and/or in Logs SIG call (Tue 10am PT). I recommend going through some layers of history in 
#3406, https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/issues/695.

The key motivation is that logs are way more flexible and having two similar but different ways to record events is not good for the ecosystem.

Author: Given that the concern is not specific to this OTEP and is to the whole Events vision that was extensively discussed in the community and the corresponding [OTEP](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/265) is merged, I'm going to resolve this discussion. 

Please don't think I'm dismissing the concern, but it'd be best to bring it up to the OTel Specification call and raise in front of a broader audience. It'd be great to combine with related concerns raised in https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/4393 by @adriangb

     shutdown SHOULD be recorded with severity `Error`

     These errors are not expected and may indicate a bug in the application logic
     that this application instance was not able to recover from or a gap in the error
     handling logic.

     Examples:

      - Background job terminates with an exception
      - HTTP framework error handler catches exception thrown by the application code.

        Note: some frameworks use exceptions as a communication mechanism when request fails. For example,
        Spring users can throw [ResponseStatusException](https://docs.spring.io/spring-framework/docs/current/javadoc-api/org/springframework/web/server/ResponseStatusException.html)
        exception to return unsuccessful status code. Such exceptions represent errors already handled by the application code.
        Application code, in this case, is expected to log this at appropriate severity.
        General-purpose instrumentation MAY record such errors, but at severity not higher than `Warn`.

   - Errors that result in application shutdown SHOULD be recorded with severity `Fatal`.

      - The application detects an invalid configuration at startup and shuts down.

>       - The application encounters a (presumably) terminal error, such as an out-of-memory condition.

Reviewer 2: Isn't the description here: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/logs/data-model.md#field-severitynumber good enough?

Author: for fatal error - yes, but for the rest of them - I don't think so.

listen to exceptions that remained unhandled.

```java
import org.springframework.kafka.listener.RecordInterceptor;
final class InstrumentedRecordInterceptor<K, V> implements RecordInterceptor<K, V> {
  ...

  @Override
  public void failure(ConsumerRecord<K, V> record, Exception exception, Consumer<K, V> consumer) {
    // we should capture this error in the scope of the processing span (or pass its context explicitly).
    logger.logRecordBuilder()
      .setSeverity(Severity.ERROR)
      .addAttribute("messaging.message.id", record.getId())
      ...
      .addException(ex)
      .setBody("Consumer error")
      .emit();
    // ..
  }
}
```

See [corresponding Java (tracing) instrumentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/main/instrumentation/spring/spring-kafka-2.7/library/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/instrumentation/spring/kafka/v2_7/InstrumentedRecordInterceptor.java) for the details.

## Trade-offs and mitigations

1. Switching from recording exceptions as span events to log records is a breaking change
   for any component following existing [exception guidance](/specification/trace/exceptions.md).

   **Mitigation:**

>    - OpenTelemetry API and/or SDK in the future may provide opt-in span events -> log-based events conversion,

Reviewer 2: > In the long term, errors recorded on logs **will replace span events**
(according to [Event vision OTEP](./0265-event-vision.md)).

I think this mechanism will be necessary for migrating from Span Events to Exception Log Records and we should probably have a separate OTEP for this.

Author: I agree, I don't know if we need otep though - created https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/4393 and we already have some implementations in the wild

     but that's not enough - instrumentations will have to change their behavior to report errors
     as logs with appropriate severity.

>    - We should provide opt-in mechanism for existing instrumentations to switch to logs.

Reviewer 2: This will not work for instrumentations that we do not own.

Author: I think the first point works though (conversion with some limitations).
I don't pursue a goal to switch everyone to logs though, if 3rd part instrumentation wants to follow otel opt-in feature flags or invent their own - they could. 

So you have something else in mind?

Author: I updated this section (and moved migration to its own section), PTAL and let me know if you see any gaps.

2. Recording exceptions as log-based events would result in UX degradation for users
   leveraging trace-only backends such as Jaeger.

   **Mitigation:**
   - OpenTelemetry API and/or SDK may provide span events -> log events conversion.

>      See also [Event vision OTEP](./0265-event-vision.md#relationship-to-span-events).

Reviewer 9: Is the mitigation supposed to be long term instead of short term for trace-only backends then?

Author: I updated this section. Migration plan is now part of the OTEP (details like feature-flag name would be defined when implementing this OTEP in the spec). Effectively instrumentations that record exceptions on span events should continue doing so (by default) for the current major version. 

The part about conversion is in the https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/4393 - it's a shorter term thing and is already implemented in some languages ([Java](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-contrib/pull/1551)).

PTAL and feel free to reopen the discussion if you feel I didn't address your question.

# Recording exceptions and errors on logs

<!-- toc -->

- [Motivation](#motivation)
- [Guidance](#guidance)
  * [Details](#details)
- [API changes](#api-changes)
- [Migrating instrumentations](#migrating-instrumentations)
- [Examples](#examples)
  * [Logging errors from client library in a user application](#logging-errors-from-client-library-in-a-user-application)
  * [Logging errors inside the natively instrumented Library](#logging-errors-inside-the-natively-instrumented-library)
  * [Logging errors in messaging processor](#logging-errors-in-messaging-processor)
    + [Natively instrumented library](#natively-instrumented-library)
    + [Instrumentation library](#instrumentation-library)
- [Trade-offs and mitigations](#trade-offs-and-mitigations)
- [Prior art and alternatives](#prior-art-and-alternatives)
- [Open questions](#open-questions)
- [Future possibilities](#future-possibilities)

<!-- tocstop -->

This OTEP provides guidance on how to record errors using OpenTelemetry Logs,

> focusing on minimizing duplication and providing context to reduce the noise.

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't the specification itself contain such guidance? I think that the OTEP can describe why such guidance is needed and contain a draft version, but I think it would be good to have guidance in the spec itself.

Author: sure, I think this guidance belongs more in semconv than in the spec, but I agree that if this otep is merged, the guidance would need to be published somewhere.

In the long term, errors recorded on logs **will replace span events**
(according to [Event vision OTEP](./0265-event-vision.md)).

> [!NOTE]
> Throughout this OTEP, the terms exception and error are defined as follows:
>
> - *Error* refers to a general concept describing any non-success condition,
>   which may manifest as an exception, non-successful status code, or an invalid
>   response.
> - *Exception* specifically refers to runtime exceptions and their associated stack traces.

## Motivation

> Today, OTel supports recording *exceptions* using span events available through the Trace API. Outside the OTel world,

Reviewer: one nit thing to add to this section: OTel had conventions for reporting exceptions via Logs and Spans, but never made any recommendation on which to pick. This OTEP makes a formal recommendation, ensuring users can expect consistent behavior.

Author: added 

> As a result, we have two
different ways to record exceptions resulting in inconsistent user experience.

  as they bubble up, leading to duplication and aggravating the verbosity problem.
- severity depends on the context and, in the general case, is not known at the time the error
  occurs since errors are frequently handled (suppressed, retried, ignored) by the caller.

In this OTEP, we'll provide guidance around recording errors that minimizes duplication,
allows reducing noise with configuration, and allows capturing errors in the
absence of a recorded span.

This guidance applies to general-purpose instrumentations, including natively
instrumented libraries.

Application developers should consider following it as a starting point, but
they are encouraged to adjust it to their needs.

## Guidance

This guidance boils down to the following:

Instrumentations SHOULD record error information along with relevant context as
a log record with appropriate severity.

Instrumentations SHOULD set severity to `Error` or higher only when the log describes a
problem affecting application functionality, availability, performance, security, or
another aspect that is important for the given type of application.

> When instrumentation records an exception, it SHOULD provide

Reviewer: is this recommendation applicable to those libraries that directly use OTel Log/Event API? Wondering how to actually pass the whole exception instance to OTel, as that API would be language specific and may/may-not exist.

Author: It's a recommendation to everyone. Most logging facades allow to pass exception instance (ILogger, slf4j and log4j in java, python logging, to name a few). It's a bridge responsibility to carry it over to OTel as is. It might be impossible in some cases, so it comes with SHOULD.

Changing it to

> When instrumentation records an exception, it SHOULD, when possible, provide
the whole exception instance to the logging facade or OTel API so the OTel SDK
can record it fully or partially based on provided configuration. The default OTel SDK
behavior SHOULD be to record exception stack traces when logging exceptions at `Error`
or higher severity.

     These errors are not expected and may indicate a bug in the application logic
     that this application instance was not able to recover from, or a gap in the error
     handling logic.

     Examples:

      - A background job terminates with an exception
      - An HTTP framework error handler catches an exception thrown by the application code.

        Note: some frameworks use exceptions as a communication mechanism when a request fails. For example,
        Spring users can throw a [ResponseStatusException](https://docs.spring.io/spring-framework/docs/current/javadoc-api/org/springframework/web/server/ResponseStatusException.html)
        exception to return an unsuccessful status code. Such exceptions represent errors already handled by the application code.
        Application code, in this case, is expected to log this at the appropriate severity.
        General-purpose instrumentation MAY record such errors, but at a severity not higher than `Warn`.

   - Errors that result in application shutdown SHOULD be recorded with severity `Fatal`.

     Examples:

      - The application detects an invalid configuration at startup and shuts down.

>       - The application encounters a (presumably) terminal error, such as an out-of-memory condition.

Reviewer: I don't think we can (or should) ever attempt to report OOM condition?

Author: why? they are not always terminal - apps can recover from them and I've seem plenty of OOMs in logs.

Author: Added 

>     Note: While fatal errors SHOULD be recorded, the issues causing them may often
    prevent the application from shutting down gracefully and exporting telemetry.

7. The OTel SDK SHOULD record stack traces on exceptions with severity `Error` or higher and SHOULD allow users to
   change the threshold.

   See [logback exception config](https://logback.qos.ch/manual/layouts.html#ex) for an example of configuration that
   records stack trace conditionally.

8. Instrumentation libraries that record exceptions using span events SHOULD gracefully migrate
   to log-based exceptions, offering it as an opt-in feature first and then switching to log-based exceptions
   in the next major version update.

## API changes

> [!NOTE]
>
> It should not be an instrumentation concern to decide whether an exception stack trace
> should be recorded or not.
>
> A natively instrumented library may write logs providing an exception instance
> through a log bridge and not be aware of this guidance.
>
> It also may be desirable by some vendors/apps to record all exception details at all levels.

The OTel Logs API SHOULD provide methods that enrich log records with exception details such as
`setException(exception)` and similar to the [RecordException](../specification/trace/api.md#record-exception) method on span.

> The OTel SDK, based on the log severity and configuration, SHOULD record exception details fully or partially.

Reviewer: would be good to mention in "back-combat" way here,. If an sdk is doing stack-trace for all severity today, then changing it to only Error/above might be seen as breaking.

Author: added "Migrating log bridges" section

The signature of the method is to be determined by each language
and can be overloaded as appropriate, including the ability to customize stack trace
collection.

It MUST be possible to efficiently set exception information on a log record based on configuration

> and without using the `setException` method.

Author: changed to 

> It MUST be possible to efficiently set `exception.*` attributes on a log record
based on configuration and without using the `setException` method.

LMK if it's clear now

## Migrating instrumentations

> [!NOTE]
> New instrumentations or existing ones that do not record exceptions on span events SHOULD
> NOT start recording exceptions on span events. They SHOULD NOT implement the migration plan
> described below.
>
> This section covers migration recommendations for existing instrumentations that already
> report exceptions using span events.

We will define a configuration option to let users choose if they want instrumentations to record exceptions
on span events or logs.

Specific instrumentation SHOULD default to recording exceptions on span events in its current major version
and record them on logs only when the user opts-in.

> In the next major version, this instrumentation SHOULD stop recording exceptions on span events.

Reviewer: Based on concerns raised about losing ability to see Exception at the Span, we should probably define a way to get old behavior back even for those new instrumentations that report exception via Log/Event. 

A LogRecordProcessor that attaches Exception info on the active span should work.
A component doing this is already in Otel .NET Contrib : https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet-contrib/tree/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Extensions#attachlogstoactivityevent
(It takes Log and adds it fully to Span, but can be modified to just store the exception part alone)

Author: thanks for pointing to `AttachLogsToActivityEvent` - I added  it to https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/4393 and also added 

> Users who still want to receive exceptions as span events MAY achieve it with [logs -> span events conversion](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/4393).

on the next line

This is a simplified version of [stability opt-in migration](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/727700406f9e6cc3f4e4680a81c4c28f2eb71569/docs/http/README.md?plain=1#L13-L37) used in semantic conventions.

## Examples

### Logging errors from client library in a user application

```java
StorageClient client = createClient(endpoint, credential);
...
try {
    BinaryData content = client.download(contentId);

    return response(content, HttpStatus.OK);
} catch (ContentNotFoundException ex) {

>     // we don't record exception here, but may record a log record without exception info

Reviewer: this comment is confusing as we use setException(ex). Whether the sdk uses the ex or not is not instrumentation concern, right?

Author: good catch, removed

        .addAttribute(AttributeKey.stringKey("com.example.content.id"), contentId)
        // let's assume it's expected that some content can disappear
        .severityNumber(Severity.INFO)
        // by default SDK will only populate `exception.type` and `exception.message`
        // since severity is `INFO`, but it should not be instrumentation library
        // concern
        .setException(ex)
        .emit();

    return response(HttpStatus.NOT_FOUND);
} catch (ForbiddenException ex) {
    logger.logRecordBuilder()
        // let's assume it's really unexpected for this application - service does not have access to the underlying storage.
        .severityNumber(Severity.ERROR)
        .addAttribute(AttributeKey.stringKey("com.example.content.id"), contentId)
        // by default SDK will record stack trace for this exception since the severity is ERROR
        .setException(ex)
        .emit();

    return response(HttpStatus.INTERNAL_SERVER_ERROR);
}
```

### Logging errors inside the natively instrumented Library

It's a common practice to record errors using logging libraries. Client libraries that are natively instrumented with OpenTelemetry should

> leverage the OTel Events/Logs API for their exception logging purposes.

Reviewer: Are we ready to ask other libraries to use Otel Event/Log API, instead of their existing logging library today? We still don't have the reverse-bridge to send Otel logs to existing destinations ...

Reviewer 2: > We still don't have the reverse-bridge to send Otel logs to existing destinations ...

Could it not be simply done by a log record processor?

Reviewer: > We still don't have the reverse-bridge to send Otel logs to existing destinations ...

> Could it not be simply done by a log record processor? This would be simply exporting log records to logging libraries 🙃

I am not sure if it is that simple! Anyway, not something to block this PR. I just wanted to confirm if we really asking libraries to bet on Otel Log/Event API...

Reviewer: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/4333/files#r1943585553 I am okay with MAY suggestion Trask made above.

        } catch (SocketException ex) {
            logger.logRecordBuilder()
              // we'll retry it, so it's info or lower.
              // we'll write a warn for the overall operation if retries are exhausted.
              .setSeverity(Severity.INFO)
              .addAttribute("connection.id", this.getId())
              .addException(ex)
              .setBody("Failed to send content")
              .emit();

            throw ex;
        }
    }
}
```

### Logging errors in messaging processor

#### Natively instrumented library

In this example, application code provides the callback to the messaging processor to
execute for each message.

```java
MessagingProcessorClient processorClient = new MessagingClientBuilder()
  .endpoint(endpoint)
  .queueName(queueName)
  .processor()
  .processMessage(messageContext -> processMessage(messageContext))
  .buildProcessorClient();

processorClient.start();
```

The `MessagingProcessorClient` implementation should catch exceptions thrown by the `processMessage` callback and log them similarly to
this example:

```java
MessageContext context = retrieveNext();
try {
  processMessage.accept(context);
} catch (Throwable t) {

>   // This natively instrumented library may use the OTel log API or another logging library such as slf4j.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // This natively instrumented library may use the OTel Logs API or another logging library such as slf4j.
```

  // Here we use Error severity since this exception was not handled by the application code.
  logger.atError()
    .addKeyValuePair("messaging.message.id", context.getMessageId())
    ...
    .setException(t)
    .log("Message processing failed");
  // error handling logic ...
}
```

If this instrumentation supports tracing, it should capture the error in the scope of the processing

> span.

Reviewer: span.start()..
 log.reportException(ex);; 
span.end().

I think it is referring to "report log before ending the span"... It may be obvious without mentioning too..

> span.

Author: yep, what @cijothomas said.

Updated to 

> If this instrumentation supports tracing, it should capture the error within the
processing span or explicitly provide trace context when emitting a log record to preserve correlation.

hope it helps

> span.

Reviewer 4: thanks!

#### Instrumentation library

> In this example, we leverage the Spring Kafka `RecordInterceptor` extensibility point that allows us to
> listen to exceptions that remained unhandled.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In this example, we leverage the Spring Kafka `RecordInterceptor` extensibility point that allows us to
listen to exceptions that were never handled.
```

```java
import org.springframework.kafka.listener.RecordInterceptor;
final class InstrumentedRecordInterceptor<K, V> implements RecordInterceptor<K, V> {
  ...

  @Override
  public void failure(ConsumerRecord<K, V> record, Exception exception, Consumer<K, V> consumer) {

>     // we should capture this error in the scope of the processing span (or pass its context explicitly).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    // We should capture this error in the scope of the processing span (or pass its context explicitly).
```

    logger.logRecordBuilder()
      .setSeverity(Severity.ERROR)
      .addAttribute("messaging.message.id", record.getId())
      ...
      .addException(ex)
      .setBody("Consumer error")
      .emit();
    // ..
  }
}
```

See [corresponding Java (tracing) instrumentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/main/instrumentation/spring/spring-kafka-2.7/library/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/instrumentation/spring/kafka/v2_7/InstrumentedRecordInterceptor.java) for the details.

## Trade-offs and mitigations

1. Switching from recording exceptions as span events to log records is a breaking change

>    for any component following existing [exception guidance](/specification/trace/exceptions.md).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   for any component following the existing [exception guidance](/specification/trace/exceptions.md).
```

> 2. Recording exceptions as log-based events would result in UX degradation for users

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Recording exceptions as log-based events will result in UX degradation for users
```

   leveraging trace-only backends such as Jaeger.

**Mitigation:**

In addition to the plan outlined in the [Migration](#migrating-instrumentations) section, we
should provide opt-in [log <-> span events conversion](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/4393)
following [Event vision OTEP](./0265-event-vision.md#relationship-to-span-events).

## Prior art and alternatives

Alternatives:

1. Deduplicate exception info by marking exception instances as logged.
   This can potentially mitigate the problem for existing applications when they log exceptions extensively.
   We should still provide optimal guidance for greenfield applications and libraries,
   covering the wider problem of recording errors.

## Open questions

- Do we need to have log-related limits similar to [span event limits](/specification/trace/sdk.md#span-limits)

>   on the SDK level?

Reviewer 2: We already have attribute limits that should be used here: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/common/README.md#attribute-limits.

I think we can remove this question.

Reviewer: That limit is not applicable to

Author: removed, it was added before to address number-of-events-per-span rather than attribute-size limit

## Future possibilities

Exception stack traces can be recorded in structured form instead of their
string representation. It may be easier to process and consume them in this form.

> This is out of scope of this OTEP.

Reviewer 2: [`exception.stacktrace`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.29.0/docs/attributes-registry/exception.md#exception-stacktrace) is already Stable.

Some languages have exception stacktraces as string. E.g. https://learn.microsoft.com/pl-pl/dotnet/api/system.exception.stacktrace?view=net-9.0

Unless there are good reasons I would rather not add structured stacktraces.

Reviewer: There were spec discussions about defining a structured stack trace, but it was deemed complex and stringified version is what everyone has now.

Author: removed, it's out of scope anyway

The OTel SDK, based on the log severity and configuration, SHOULD record exception details fully,
partially, or not at all.

The signature of the method is to be determined by each language
and can be overloaded as appropriate, for example to provide custom stack traces
collection when the language does not provide a built-in mechanism for it.

It MUST be possible to efficiently set `exception.*` attributes on a log record
based on configuration and without using the `setException` method.

### Configuration

OTel SHOULD provide a configuration option allowing to specify the severity threshold
at which exception stack traces are to be collected.

It SHOULD be possible to distinguish between the absence of configuration and an
explicit configuration for the default value to support [backward-compatibility in log bridges](#migrating-log-bridges).

The exact configuration option name and semantics will be defined at the OTEP implementation stage.
For the scope of this document, let's use 'exception stack traces collection severity threshold'.

## Migrating instrumentations

### Migrating from span events

> [!NOTE]

> > New instrumentations or existing ones that do not record exceptions on span events SHOULD
> > NOT start recording exceptions on span events.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> Once the specification for recording exceptions on logs is stabilized,
> and once there is stable support for it in the relevant SDK, new instrumentations
> (or existing ones that do not already record exceptions on span events)
> SHOULD NOT start recording exceptions on span events.
>
> Users of these new instrumentations will still be able to opt-in to sending
> their events to span events using
> [log <-> span events conversion](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/4393).
```

Author: make sense, rewrote slightly

              .emit();

            throw ex;
        }
    }
}
```

### Logging errors in a messaging processor

#### Natively instrumented library

In this example, application code provides the callback to the messaging processor for
processing each message.

```java
MessagingProcessorClient processorClient = new MessagingClientBuilder()
  .endpoint(endpoint)
  .queueName(queueName)
  .processor()
  .processMessage(messageContext -> processMessage(messageContext))
  .buildProcessorClient();

processorClient.start();
```

The `MessagingProcessorClient` implementation should catch exceptions thrown by the `processMessage` callback and log them similarly to
this example:

```java
MessageContext context = retrieveNext();
try {
  processMessage.accept(context);
} catch (Throwable t) {
  // This natively instrumented library may use the OTel Logs API or another logging library such as slf4j.
  // Here we use Error severity since this exception was not handled by the application code.
  logger.atError()
    .addKeyValuePair("messaging.message.id", context.getMessageId())
    ...
    .setException(t)
    .log("Message processing failed");
  // error handling logic ...
}
```

> If this instrumentation supports tracing, it should capture the error within the
> processing span or explicitly provide trace context when emitting a log record to preserve correlation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If this instrumentation captures message processing as a span, it should pass that span's context
(either implicitly or explicitly) when emitting the log record to preserve correlation.
```

   create local root spans, SHOULD record logs for unhandled errors with `Error` severity.

   Some runtimes provide a global exception handler that can be used to log exceptions.
   Priority should be given to the instrumentation point where the operation context is available.
   Language SIGs are encouraged to give runtime-specific guidance. For example, here is the
   [.NET guidance](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/blob/610045298873397e55e0df6cd777d4901ace1f63/docs/trace/reporting-exceptions/README.md#unhandled-exception)
   for recording exceptions on traces.

3. Natively instrumented libraries SHOULD record a log describing an error and the context it happened in
   as soon as the error is detected (or where the most context is available).

4. It's NOT RECOMMENDED to record the same error as it propagates through the call stack, or
   to attach the same instance of an exception to multiple log records.

5. An error SHOULD be logged with appropriate severity depending on the available context.

   - Errors that don't indicate actual issues SHOULD be recorded with
     severity not higher than `Info`.

>      Such errors can be used to control application logic and have a minor impact, if any,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     Such errors have a minor impact, if any,
```

     on application functionality, availability, or performance (beyond the performance hit introduced
     if an exception is used to control application logic).

     Examples:

>       - an error is returned when checking the existence of an optional dependency or resource.

Reviewer 4: (if that's what you mean here, just think it's a more common term)
```suggestion
      - an error is returned when checking the existence of an optional service or resource.
```

      - an exception is thrown on the server when the client disconnects before reading
        the full response from the server.

   - Errors that are expected to be retried or handled by the caller or another
     layer of the component SHOULD be recorded with severity not higher than `Warn`.

     Such errors represent transient failures that are common and expected in
     distributed applications. They typically increase the latency of individual
     operations and have a minor impact on overall application availability.

     Examples:

>       - an attempt to connect to a required remote dependency times out.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      - an attempt to connect to a remote service times out.
```

>       - a remote dependency returns a 401 "Unauthorized" response code.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      - a remote service returns a 401 "Unauthorized" response code.
```

      - writing data to a file results in an IO exception.

>       - a remote dependency returns a 503 "Service Unavailable" response for 5 times in a row,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      - a remote service returns a 503 "Service Unavailable" response for 5 times in a row,
```

        General-purpose instrumentation MAY record such errors, but at a severity not higher than `Warn`.

   - Errors that result in application shutdown SHOULD be recorded with severity `Fatal`.

     Examples:

      - The application detects an invalid configuration at startup and shuts down.
      - The application encounters a (presumably) terminal error, such as an out-of-memory condition.

    Note: While fatal errors SHOULD be recorded, the issues causing them may often
    prevent the application from shutting down gracefully and exporting telemetry.

6. When recording exceptions on logs, applications and instrumentations are encouraged to add additional attributes
   to describe the context that the exception was thrown in.
   They are also encouraged to define their own error events and enrich them with exception details.

7. The OTel SDK SHOULD record stack traces on exceptions with severity `Error` or higher and SHOULD allow users to
   change the threshold.

   See [logback exception config](https://logback.qos.ch/manual/layouts.html#ex) for an example of configuration that
   records stack traces conditionally.

> 
> 8. Instrumentation libraries that record exceptions using span events SHOULD gracefully migrate
>    to log-based exceptions, offering it as an opt-in feature first and then switching to log-based exceptions
>    in its next major version update.

Reviewer 4: can this be removed now (replaced by migration section below)?

```suggestion
```

Author: great point!

## Spec changes

> [!NOTE]
>
> It should not be an instrumentation concern to decide whether an exception stack trace
> should be recorded or not.
>
> A natively instrumented library may write logs providing an exception instance
> through a log bridge and not be aware of this guidance.
>
> It also may be desirable by some vendors/apps to record all exception details at all levels.

### API

The OTel Logs API SHOULD provide methods that enrich log records with exception details such as
`setException(exception)` and similar to the [RecordException](../specification/trace/api.md#record-exception) method on span.

> The OTel SDK, based on the log severity and configuration, SHOULD record exception details either fully or partially.

Reviewer 4: or not at all?

The signature of the method is to be determined by each language
and can be overloaded as appropriate, including the ability to customize stack trace

> collection.

Reviewer 4: would a caller know they want to customize stack trace collection?

Author: updated to 

> The signature of the method is to be determined by each language
and can be overloaded as appropriate, for example to provide custom stack traces
collection when the language does not provide a built-in mechanism for it.

This is addressing @jsuereth comment https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/4333#discussion_r1905450258 and targets [Go](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/77304845/how-to-log-errors-with-log-slog), old C++ and other environments where there is no stack trace collection. 

I'm thinking about some callback mechanism that could collect exception information if it's going to used by OTel SDK.

LMK if makes sense now.

It MUST be possible to efficiently set `exception.*` attributes on a log record
based on configuration and without using the `setException` method.

### Configuration

> OTel SHOULD provide configuration option allowing to specify severity threshold

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
OTel SHOULD provide a configuration option allowing to specify the severity threshold
```

at which exception stack traces are to be collected.

It SHOULD be possible to distinguish between the absence of configuration and an
explicit configuration for the default value to support [backward-compatibility in log bridges](#migrating-log-bridges).

The exact configuration option name and semantics will be defined at the OTEP implementation stage.
For the scope of this document, let's use 'exception stack traces collection severity threshold'.

## Migrating instrumentations

### Migrating from span events

> [!NOTE]
> New instrumentations or existing ones that do not record exceptions on span events SHOULD
> NOT start recording exceptions on span events.

We will define a configuration option to let users choose if they want instrumentations to record exceptions
on span events or logs.

> Specific instrumentation SHOULD default to recording exceptions on span events in its current major version

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Existing instrumentations SHOULD default to recording exceptions on span events in their current major version
```

and record them on logs only when the user opts-in.

In the next major version, this instrumentation SHOULD stop recording exceptions on span events.

Users who still want to receive exceptions as span events MAY achieve it with [logs -> span events
conversion](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/4393).

This is a simplified version of [stability opt-in migration](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/727700406f9e6cc3f4e4680a81c4c28f2eb71569/docs/http/README.md?plain=1#L13-L37) used in semantic conventions.

### Migrating log bridges

Today log bridges translate exception instances into attributes on OTel log records.

Log bridges that capture stack traces regardless of log record severity,
in their current major version, SHOULD preserve their current behavior when the

> user has not provided explicit [exception stack traces collection severity threshold](#configuration).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
user has not provided an explicit [exception stack traces collection severity threshold](#configuration).
```

> If user has provided explicit exception stack traces collection severity threshold,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If the user has provided an explicit exception stack traces collection severity threshold,
```

> log bridge SHOULD record stack traces accordingly and MAY use `setException` convenience

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
log bridges SHOULD record stack traces accordingly and MAY use `setException` convenience
```

> method described in [API changes](#api-changes) section.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
method described in the [API changes](#api-changes) section.
```

> In the next major version, log bridge SHOULD start using `setException` method or

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In their next major version, log bridges SHOULD start using `setException` method or
```

         if (response.statusCode() == 200) {
             return readContent(response);
         }

         logger.logRecordBuilder()
            // In general we don't know if it's an error - we expect the caller
            // to handle it and decide. So this is a warning (at most).
            // If the exception thrown below remains unhandled, it'd be logged by the global handler.
            .setSeverity(Severity.WARN)
            .addAttribute(AttributeKey.stringKey("com.example.content.id"), contentId)
            .addAttribute(AttributeKey.stringKey("http.response.status_code"), response.statusCode())
            .setBody("Unexpected HTTP response")
            .emit();

        if (response.statusCode() == 404) {
            throw new ContentNotFoundException(readErrorInfo(response));
        }

        ...
    }
}
```

Network-level errors are part of normal life; we should consider using low severity for them.

```java
public class NetworkClient {

    private final Logger logger;
    ...
    public long send(ByteBuffer content) {
        try {
            return socketChannel.write(content);
        } catch (SocketException ex) {
            logger.logRecordBuilder()

>               // we'll retry it, so it's info or lower.
>               // we'll write a warn for the overall operation if retries are exhausted.

Author: ```suggestion
              // We'll write a warn for the overall operation if retries are exhausted.
```

  // Here we use Error severity since this exception was not handled by the application code.
  logger.atError()
    .addKeyValuePair("messaging.message.id", context.getMessageId())
    ...
    .setException(t)
    .log("Message processing failed");
  // error handling logic ...
}
```

If this instrumentation captures message processing as a span, it should pass that span's context
(either implicitly or explicitly) when emitting the log record to preserve correlation.

#### Instrumentation library

In this example, we leverage the Spring Kafka `RecordInterceptor` extensibility point that allows us to
listen to exceptions that were never handled.

```java
import org.springframework.kafka.listener.RecordInterceptor;
final class InstrumentedRecordInterceptor<K, V> implements RecordInterceptor<K, V> {
  ...

  @Override
  public void failure(ConsumerRecord<K, V> record, Exception exception, Consumer<K, V> consumer) {
    // We should capture this error in the scope of the processing span (or pass its context explicitly).
    logger.logRecordBuilder()
      .setSeverity(Severity.ERROR)
      .addAttribute("messaging.message.id", record.getId())
      ...

>       .addException(ex)

Author: ```suggestion
      .addException(exception)
```

final class InstrumentedRecordInterceptor<K, V> implements RecordInterceptor<K, V> {
  ...

  @Override
  public void failure(ConsumerRecord<K, V> record, Exception exception, Consumer<K, V> consumer) {
    // We should capture this error in the scope of the processing span (or pass its context explicitly).
    logger.logRecordBuilder()
      .setSeverity(Severity.ERROR)
      .addAttribute("messaging.message.id", record.getId())
      ...
      .addException(exception)
      .setBody("Consumer error")
      .emit();
    // ..
  }
}
```

See [corresponding Java (tracing) instrumentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/main/instrumentation/spring/spring-kafka-2.7/library/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/instrumentation/spring/kafka/v2_7/InstrumentedRecordInterceptor.java) for the details.

## Trade-offs and mitigations

1. Switching from recording exceptions as span events to log records is a breaking change
   for any component following the existing [exception guidance](/specification/trace/exceptions.md).

2. Recording exceptions as logs will result in UX degradation for users
   leveraging trace-only backends such as Jaeger.

> 3. Having exceptions exported and stored along with span is beneficial for some backends.

Reviewer 8: Commenting here to follow the request of commenting somewhere vaguely relevant for a threaded discussion.

Let me check if I understand things correctly. Currently this code:

```python
from opentelemetry.sdk.trace import TracerProvider
from opentelemetry.sdk.trace.export import SimpleSpanProcessor, ConsoleSpanExporter
from requests import ConnectionError

provider = TracerProvider()
provider.add_span_processor(SimpleSpanProcessor(ConsoleSpanExporter()))
tracer = provider.get_tracer(__name__)

with tracer.start_as_current_span("foo"):
    raise ConnectionError("bar")
```

prints a span containing:

```json
{
  "status": {
    "status_code": "ERROR",
    "description": "ConnectionError: bar"
  },
  "attributes": {},
  "events": [
    {
      "name": "exception",
      "timestamp": "2025-02-07T10:35:52.726398Z",
      "attributes": {
        "exception.type": "requests.exceptions.ConnectionError",
        "exception.message": "bar",
        "exception.stacktrace": "Traceback...",
        "exception.escaped": "False"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

Am I correct that the goal is to instead emit the following?

```json
{
  "status": {
    "status_code": "ERROR",
    "description": "bar"
  },
  "attributes": {
    "error.type": "requests.exceptions.ConnectionError"
  }
}
```

The differences being:

1. Span events are gone, and the stacktrace will only be found in a child event-log.
2. The span event attribute `exception.type` containing the fully qualified exception type name is now in the span attribute `error.type`
3. The status description no longer contains the (unqualified) exception name.

Author: > Am I correct that the goal is to instead emit the following?

Not the goal for this OTEP. This OTEP tells how to record exception and errors on logs and does not change how the span status or attributes are populated. 

> Span events are gone, and the stacktrace will only be found in a child event-log.

yes

> The span event attribute exception.type containing the fully qualified exception type name is now in the span attribute error.type

It's already there, no part of this OTEP - https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/general/recording-errors.md.
`Error.type` on span can as well be something more specific depending on what tracing instrumentation decided to put into `error.type`.  Error logs and traces are likely to be captured at different layers and there is no assumption that all exceptions will make it to the tracing layer. Tracing layer may get aggregated exception or a different one suppressing the original one. 

> The status description no longer contains the (unqualified) exception name.

This OTEP does not change anything about span status.

Reviewer 8: > Not the goal for this OTEP.

I understand that, but this OTEP is removing the span events so I want to make sure that the spec (or the plan for the spec) ensures that at least `exception.type` and `exception.message` are still directly in the span.

> > The span event attribute exception.type containing the fully qualified exception type name is now in the span attribute error.type
> 
> It's already in the spec, not part of this OTEP - https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/general/recording-errors.md.

But before seeing this issue I'd never heard of `error.type` before. That page is apparently less than a month old but the semantic convention seems to be significantly older so I'm trying to figure out what happened. The Python SDK currently doesn't set that attribute based on the snippet above, is that just because it's a bit behind? https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/general/recording-errors.md#recording-exceptions shows `error.type` and the span status being recorded manually. Are they not supposed to be recorded automatically by the appropriate tracer/span API methods when an exception bubbles through? BTW the snippet doesn't actually end the span.

Author: This attribute is mentioned in every semantic conventions, e.g. https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/http/http-spans.md and the page is a generalization. Python should set error.type in specific instrumentations. 
If python supports ending span with exception in a generic way, it should start setting `error.type` there - please create an issue for them if they don't.

Author: clarification on "I understand that, but this OTEP is removing the span events "

It does not remove span events. It's a design proposal for the future when events are stabilized to stop using span events. The actionable part of your feedback that I see is that we should consider having something like `Span.end(exception)` instead of `Span.recordException` that would record the `exception.*` attributes (except the stacktrace) on span and ensure all the details are populated. Did I get it right?

Reviewer 8: Something like that, yes.

What's the plan for `Span.recordException`? Will that method be removed, or will it switch to generating a child event-log?

Author: there is no concrete plan yet. It'd be great if you could create an issue in this repo to start the discussion on migration details.

Reviewer 4: > I understand that, but this OTEP is removing the span events so I want to make sure that the spec (or the plan for the spec) ensures that at least `exception.type` and `exception.message` are still directly in the span.

I like this, related: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/issues/7298#issuecomment-2828131150
